https://www.google.ru/search?q=consumer+green+tech+is+good+for+the+environment&oq=consumer+green+tech+is+good+for+the+environment&aqs=chrome..69i57.12087j0j4&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8#q=consumer+green+tech+is+good+for+the+environment&newwindow=1&start=10

Five Benefits of Embracing Sustainability and Green Manufacturing  6
BY BRIAN LAGAS ON	SEPTEMBER 10, 2015 · BUSINESS, SUSTAINABILITY, TRENDING
Embracing sustainable and green principles is not just a trend. Cultivating sustainable and green practices helps organizations become more efficient, competitive and profitable. It’s more than simply “a good thing to do.” Manufacturers are realizing the many practical short-term and long-term financial benefits to implementing environmentally conscious improvements.

The Difference Between Sustainability and “Going Green”

“Going green” is not the same thing as sustainability, albeit they are related. Although the terms are often used interchangeably, green is more frequently associated with a singular product or process. Examples include improving a specific operation so that it does not harm the environment or creating a product made entirely out of recycled materials.

Sustainability is typically more associated with an organization’s holistic approach; it takes the entire production process and logistics into consideration. For example, you may purchase a green product made out of recycled goods. However, if that product was made overseas, and environmentally harmful methods were used to transport that product to the United States, this would not be adhering to sustainable principles.

In the manufacturing world, it is advantageous to focus on both green and sustainability. While targeted improvements can be beneficial to your company, looking at the “bigger picture” maximizes the perks of an environmental focus. Here are five critical ways to embrace sustainability and green to positively impact your organization:

1. Reduce Energy-Related Costs

Energy and water costs are a prime concern for manufacturers. Focusing on improvements can reduce these expenses. Often, these improvements are realized as annual savings as opposed to quicker, short-term cost reductions.

Switching to energy-efficient lighting and adjusting lighting levels in accordance with your production schedule will reduce your long-term electrical costs. Regular equipment inspections will also prove beneficial. For example, air compressor leaks can be a waste of energy and increase expenses. Changing how you package your products and supplies can provide cost reductions and free up space at your facility. Solar and wind energy, along with energy efficient equipment and machinery, will greatly reduce monthly utility bills. Implementing strategies such as recycling and going paperless will also save on supply costs. Sustainability can improve your bottom-line.

2. Attract New Customers and Increase Sales

Green and sustainable practices can make your company more marketable. Consumers are more conscious of the environment, and making improvements will strengthen your reputation. Whether you’re an OEM or a supplier, highlighting your initiatives to the public will help you attract a whole new base of customers, resulting in increased sales. This is important to manufacturers seeking government contracts where green manufacturing standards are often a factor.

Technology and social media have enabled buyers to easily (and publicly) promote or criticize companies for their green practices, or lack thereof.

3. Tax Incentives

There are a variety of tax credits and rebates on both the federal and state level for manufacturers who proactively implement more sustainable improvements. There may be incentives available to your business. Check out:
U.S. Department of Energy’s website
Database of State Incentives for Renewables & Efficiency

4. Boost Workforce Morale and Innovations

Sustainability improvements are a collaborative effort. When employees work together to identify and implement green and sustainable initiatives, it fosters a culture of teamwork and continuous improvement. Employees work harder when they are engaged and have a sense of pride in their company. By internally communicating the importance of changes and the impact they are having on the business and environment, manufacturers will positively influence their corporate culture.

Sustainability can also ignite innovation. For example, if you challenge your engineers and machinists to reduce material scraps or recycle more waste during the manufacturing process, it often leads to additional ideas for operational improvements.

5. Societal Impact

In addition to helping your company’s profitability, your actions can make a real difference. By implementing changes, you will have a smaller carbon footprint and reduce the number of toxins released into the atmosphere. Future generations ultimately benefit from improved air and water quality, fewer landfills and more renewable energy sources.

Sustainability and Green Manufacturing Success Stories

U.S. manufacturers are achieving quantifiable results by working with their local MEP Centers on sustainability and green initiatives. Some successes include:

E3 Review Strengthens Virginia Company’s Environmental Commitment, Resulting in Over $200,000 in Operational Cost Savings – read more.
Lean and Clean Programs Help New Jersey Manufacturer Realize $3 Million in New / Retained Sales, 5 New Employees and $500,000 in Cost Savings – read more.
Profitable Sustainability Initiative (PSI) Helps Wisconsin Company Reduce Fuel and Emissions, Recognize $75,000 in Costs Related to Shipping – read more.
Energy Savings Project Leads Kansas Organization to more than $61,000 in Overall Equipment Savings and $24,000 in Annual Energy Savings – read more.
Energy Efficiency Project Helps New Hampshire Manufacturer Reduce Energy Consumption by 10% and Save $25,000 Annually – read more.
MEP is partnering on federal initiatives to help companies: 1) gain a competitive edge by reducing environmental costs and impact, and 2) enter new markets by developing environmentally focused materials, products, and processes. For more information about MEP’s sustainability efforts, visit our website or please contact your local MEP Center.